# Factor whitepaper

This is a huge work in progress. The original version of this project was built on top of a market system and called "regional socialism." It has close ties to mutualism and/or libertarian market socialism (probably). It can be found on [this git branch](https://gitlab.com/factor-/whitepaper/tree/regional-socialism.market-model.v1) for those curious.

The current, in-progress version is going to be based on more of a collectivist-anarchist model: products are priced via an in-kind system (labor and raw materials, as well as attempting to internalize scarcity, ecology, pollution, and waste management), jobs are paid via labor vouchers, different jobs have different wages which are derived from democratically-set attributes (skill, danger, stress, etc), the only inter-company accounting is need-based, means of production and (a lot of) housing are socialized, and a public bank is used to interface with external market systems.

On top of this, a system of investment is defined for things that are difficult to account for via labor hours/incoming orders (such as large-scale software) and can also be used to subsidize public services (such as schools or hospitals).

This whitepaper will describe the system itself, how it can be used, and the vision and goals behind it. It will do its best to avoid micromanaging what society should look like, instead seeking to become a foundation to build on top of.

One of this project's main theories is that the idea of a global socialist revolution is too implausible to ever be realized, and that the revolution will instead happen through a small group of dedicated people creating a system which *incentivizes* a socialist mode of production naturally. Therefor, this project focuses on operations that can be employed *inside of* a market/capitalist system and grow outward from there. It will also use several survival techniques to preserve its existence, the main one being its duality: members of the system will pay the at-cost (or subsidized) rate for all internal products and services while non-members will be charged at market rate, allowing for growth of the system (for buying more housing, office buildings, warehouses, factories, etc).
