# Chapter 1: Defining Factor's goals

Let's be terse and define the goals of the Factor project:

- The means of production are socialized, with the end goal of making starting and running a company much easier so that production can be spun up and down based on societal need as opposed to driven by the whims of profit and the interests of capital holders.
- Factor is a foundation for automation and democratization of economic-related processes (and the governance thereof). The ultimate goal is to have no governing authority where possible and self-governance by members where automation is infeasible.
- Personal autonomy is celebrated. Anybody can start a company, and any company can hire anybody they want. People are free to move and create as they see fit, and as long as they are meeting some societal need (as in, fulfilling orders from other companies or consumers) they are paid for their labor.
- All participation in the system is voluntary, and all members of the system must be workers in a participating company. All participating companies *must be worker-owned co-ops* and *cannot* have any non-member employees.
- If a company no longer wishes to be a member of the system, they are free to leave. However, the means of production they use will immediately start to be charged at market rate, and any housing any of the workers use (along with any other subsidized services) will also be charged at market rate. This creates incentives for membership in the system.
- Products cost *exactly* the costs of the labor and raw materials (and ecology thereof) to produce them. All pricing is automated based on the inputs and outputs of each company.
- All production is transparent: given any product, anyone can see what companies were involved in its building, from raw material to distributor, what each employee at each of the companies is paid, what orders were fulfilled to bring the product to completion, etc. All economic data is available to every member in the system.
- All purchases by consumers are encrypted and obscured such that nobody, including the people maintaining the system, knows what purchases occur (other than to know that *a purchase occurred*). All information about the purchaser, purchasee, and value exchanged is available only to the parties directly involved.
- People are paid the full value of their labor as valued by society. A labor voucher system is implemented and paid hourly. Labor voucher can be used to buy final consumer products. Wages are a product of a set of democratically-decided attributes which are assigned for each occupation (skill, need, stress, danger, etc).
- Labor voucher are destroyed when buying final consumables.
- Labor voucher do not expire, and are freely exchangeable between individuals. This allows secondary markets (like garage sales) and reduces waste by allowing second-hand items to be sold between individuals at prices negotiated freely between themselves.
- There is no system of accounting between producing entities. In other words, if my company needs to make a chair, and to do so requires three widgets, we do not *pay* the widget maker, but instead just order the widgets. The widget maker is responsible for deciding whether I am using the widgets for a productive process or not (and because they will be able to see what orders I am fulfilling that require their widgets, this will be an easy task for them). However, the chairs, if sold directly to consumers, will be sold at the cost of the labor to make the chairs in addition to *the cost of the labor and materials used to make the widgets and any other productive inputs required to make the chairs*.
- Housing is purchased from the outside market system and provided to members of the system at-cost, such that they only pay any final fees (property taxes and maintenance). Each housing unit (whether a single family home, duplex, or apartment building) will be self-managed by those living in it. There will be no landlords or HOAs, only commonly-owned property under the management of those who use it.
- A public bank is used to interface with outside market systems. This allows small or large pockets of socialism within a much larger capitalist system to exist and grow. For participants, products and services are priced at-cost, and to anyone outside the system, the products and services are priced at market value. The difference in base cost and market value (the profit) is socialized, and is used to fund some mix of:
  - Subsidies for schools, health care, and any other desired public services
  - Buying more housing or means of production
  - A social dividend where all participants within a region are given a monthly stipend based on a percentage of that month's profits
- Labor voucher are freely exchangeable with the outside market system's currency based on a simple equation of `total_tokens_issued / bank_liquid_assets`. This allows members to purchase items that are not readily available in the internal economy, and also allows them freedom to not be shackled to the "company store." It also allows members to strike a balance between non-subsidized profitable companies and non-profitable subsidized companies, such that the more subsidies exist, the lower the value of the internal labor voucher exchange rate.
- A system of social investment is defined such that if a project is deemed socially necessary on a one-time basis (such as building a bridge) or an ongoing basis (such as funding cancer research), the members working on those projects are paid their share of labor voucher, entitling them to some share of the final social productive pool. These projects use the same duality pricing system as every other company in the system: members pay the subsidized rate, non-members pay the full market value, and the difference is socialized.
- Management of all parts of the system is done democratically by members. This includes setting wage parameters, investment plans, subsidies, etc.
- All parameters of the system are regional, allowing different areas to set different parameters depending on the residents of that region. In other words, this project is made to set up a federation of local economies (although it can be used at a higher level if desired).

It's very important to note that while this paper serves as the initial blueprint, it is nothing more than a set of ideas. When Factor is deployed in the real world, the ideas and needs of the system may evolve suddenly and rapidly.

